---
title: "Kickstarting My Career Remotely"
date: 2023-02-04T00:02:17-05:00
summary: Things that helped me start my first software engineering job right out of college.
draft: false
---
In the middle of March 2020, I moved out of my apartment in Philly to go back home in Chicago and finish the remainder of my senior year. One month after graduation I worked my first fulltime software engineering job. It sure was easy to feel overwhelmed but here are some things that helped me with the transition from student to fulltime employee and more specifically remote student to remote employee. Note: these tips are suited for a scrum environment.
<br />

<h3>Starting Out</h3>
1. <b>Determine the tools the team regularly uses.</b> 
<p class="indent"> At this point, you probably know the programming language(s), cloud provider, etc. But there are usually more programs, observability tools, and database systems that the team uses on a daily basis. Identify the team's preferred IDE. This makes it easier to run your first program since you can ask your coworkers how the app is set up on their side. There are also network tools like FileZilla, WinSCP, and MobaXterm that are helpful when working with apps deployed through SSH. Another tool I used often was Beyond Compare to easily view differences between text and files. Take some time to learn the fundamentals of these tools and frameworks, but naturally you'll learn as you continue to work through projects. </p>
2. <b>Request access for systems, databases, tools ASAP</b>. <p class="indent"> Once you identify the software and tools you need, make sure you have access to use them. You might need to request admin access for download privileges, go through an internal portal to have the software installed on your machine, or maybe there's a software center application on your computer. Be prepared to wait from a couple days to a few weeks after you submit a request. Maybe you'll be lucky and won't have a lengthy wait time, but your future self will thank you for being proactive. </p>
3. <b>Walk through existing projects, business context/flow diagrams, and other documentation.</b> <p class="indent"> Waiting for access requests? Use this time to familiarize yourself with the codebase. Clone an app, go through the flow of the code, and learn how to run it on your computer. Read through project documentation and business flow diagrams. Understanding how the business works can help solidify your understanding of the technical flow. Glance at current tickets or Jira stories to get more relevant context. Your understanding will get better over time but you need to start somewhere. </p>
4. <b>Write down your experience and processes.</b> <p class="indent"> One day the tasks you were unfammiliar with will become second nature to you. As you grow as a developer, the scope of your responsiblities will change and increase. Write down step-by-step instructions on how you solved frequent problems, how to set up your local environment, and anything else you struggled with initially. This not only benefits you, but it also makes it easier to train new hires with documentation like this to reference. </p>
5. <b>Keep track of what you do everyday</b> <p class="indent"> Write about things you're doing, what you need to do, and what you've already accomplished. It can be as simple as creating a table with 3 columns: the date, my tasks, and a column for other notes. This is especially helpful for performance reviews. No need to spend hours trying to remember what you've accomplished. This makes it easy to reflect and can help you figure out how to improve. </p>

<h3>Collaboration</h3>
In text, tone can get lost in translation. It's more challenging to tell the nuance in the way people communicate if you haven't intereacted with often or in person. Be mindful of the way you communicate. Remember you all have the same goal to succeed.<br />
1. <b>Ask questions</b> <p class="indent">Feel free to reach out to your team if you have any questions. Ask your teammates if you can shadow them. It's better to ask questions sooner than later because it will save you time in the long run. Your team wants you to succeed and they're there to support you.</p>
2. <b>Join code reviews</b> <p class="indent">There are many benefits to joining code reviews early on. It helps you gain a better understanding of how applications interact with each other. You also gain another opportunity to ask in-depth questions. </p>
3. <b>Assign yourself to a ticket/Jira story</b> <p class="indent">Take responsibility to update a service or to do a research task. It can be intimidating at first, but this was one of the best ways for me to ramp up my understanding. Ask questions and your team shall guide you.</p>
4. <b>Respond to the group chat</b> <p class="indent">If someone drops a question and you think you know the answer share what you know anyway. There will be times when your team is joking around, make sure to contribute! This strengthens your sense of belonging in the team. </p>

<h3>Embrace Change</h3>
The reality is that change is constant no matter how much planning is done. Sometimes the business/client will realize they need something different and requirements will change. Sometimes you'll realize there's a better way of doing things. Keep an open mind with your expectations and adapt. Your career is a marathon, not just a sprint.