---
title: "Kickstarting My Career During a Pandemic"
date: 2023-02-04T00:02:17-05:00
summary: Things that helped me with onboarding remotely as a new grad
draft: false
---
In the middle of March 2020, I moved out of my apartment in Philly to go back home in Chicago and finish the remainder of my senior year. One month after graduation I worked my first fulltime software engineering job. It sure was easy to feel overwhelmed but here are some things that helped me with the transition from student to fulltime employee and more specifically remote student to remote employee. 
<br />

<h3>Starting Out</h3>
1. <b>Determine the tools the team regularly uses.</b> 
<p class="indent"> At this point, you probably know the programming language(s), cloud provider, etc. But there are usually additional programs, observability tools, database systems, and more that the team uses on a day to day basis. Identify the preferred IDE. This makes it easier to run your first program since you can ask your coworkers how the app is set up on their side. There are also network tools like FileZilla, WinSCP, and MobaXterm which help when working with apps deployed through SSH. Another tool I used often was Beyond Compare to easily view differences between text and files. Take some time to learn the fundamentals of these tools and frameworks, but naturally you'll learn as you continue to work through projects. </p>
2. <b>Request access for systems, databases, tools ASAP</b>. <p class="indent"> Once you identify the software and tools you need, make sure you have access to use them. You might need to request admin access for download privileges, you might need to go through an internal portal to have the software installed on your machine, or maybe there's a software center application on your computer. Be prepared to wait from a couple days to a few weeks after you submit a request. Maybe you'll be lucky and won't have a lengthy wait time, but your future self will thank you for being proactive. </p>
3. <b>Walk through existing projects, business context/flows, and other documentation.</b> <p class="indent"> Waiting for access requests? Use this time to familiarize yourself with the codebase. Clone an app, go through the flow of the code, and learn how to run it on your computer. Read through project documentation and business flow diagrams. Understanding how the business works can help solidify your understanding of the technical flow. Glance at current tickets or Jira stories to get more recent context. Your understanding will get better over time but this is a good starting place. </p>
4. <b>Write down your experience and processes.</b> <p class="indent"> One day the tasks you were unfammiliar with will become second nature to you. As you grow as a developer, the scope of your responsiblities will change and increase. Write down step-by-step instructions on how you solved frequent problems, how to set up your local environment, and anything else you struggled with initially. When you've been working on advanced things for a while sometimes you'll need to refresh your memory on how to do things like configuring your IDE. This not only benefits you, but it also makes it easier to train new hires with documentation like this to reference. </p>
5. <b>Keep track of your day-to-day and weekly ceremonies</b> <p class="indent"> What I like to do is create a table with 3 columns: the date, my tasks, and a column for other notes. This is especially helpful for performance reviews. No need to spend hours trying to remember what you've accomplished. Similarly, I create tables for sprint planning, refinement, and retrospectives. I record the date, a summary of the meeting, and actions to be taken. This context is the reason why you're building applications in this moment. Reflecting on these meetings and feedback can help you plan out improvements. </p>

<h3>Collaboration</h3>
In text, tone can get lost in translation. It's more challenging to tell the nuance in the way people communicate if you haven't intereacted with them in person. Be mindful of the way you communicate. Remember you all have the same goal to succeed.<br />
1. <b>Ask questions</b> <p class="indent">Feel free to reach out to your team if you have any questions. It's better to ask questions sooner than later because it saves time in the long run. Your team wants you to succeed and they're there to support you.</p>
2. <b>Join code reviews</b> <p class="indent">There are many benefits to joining code reviews early on. It helps you gain a better understanding of how applications interact with each other. You also gain another opportunity to ask in-depth questions. </p>
3. <b>Assign yourself to a ticket/Jira story</b> <p class="indent">It can be intimidating at first, but this was one of the best ways for me to ramp up my understanding. Ask questions and your team shall guide you.</p>
4. <b>Message the group chat</b> <p class="indent">If someone drops a question and you think you know the answer share what you know anyway. There will be times when your team is joking around, make sure to contribute! This is one of the few times you get to see the personalities of your coworkers and for you to share your own personality. </p>
5. <b>Get to know other teams in the organization</b> <p class="indent"> There is so much to learn out there. I worked a lot with the devops team, networking team, and database team as an application developer. Eventually we would help each other in times of need. This is an awesome opportunity for you to learn outside of your day to day routine and even help others.</p>

<h3>Embrace Change</h3>
The reality is that change is constant no matter how much planning is done. Sometimes the business/client will request for a something different and requirements will change. Keep an open minded with your expectations and be adaptable with your actions. Your career is a marathon, not just a sprint.